kgo: guides for workloads latency based autoscaling (#7048)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway-operator/guides/autoscaling-workloads/datadog.md

    name: echo
  minReplicas: 1
  maxReplicas: 10
  behavior:
    scaleDown:
      stabilizationWindowSeconds: 1
      policies:
      - type: Percent
        value: 100
        periodSeconds: 10
    scaleUp:
      stabilizationWindowSeconds: 1
      policies:
      - type: Percent
        value: 100
        periodSeconds: 2
      - type: Pods
        value: 4
        periodSeconds: 2
      selectPolicy: Max

  metrics:
  - type: External
    external:
      metric:
        name: datadogmetric@default:echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg
      target:
        type: Value
        value: 40
```

This HPA will watch for `echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg` `DatadogMetric` from `default` namespace and it will scale
`echo` `Deployment` in that namespace to aim for 40ms average response time.

When everything is configured correctly, `DatadogMetric`'s status will update and it will now have a reference to the HPA:

```bash
kubectl get -n default datadogmetric echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg -w
NAME                             ACTIVE   VALID   VALUE               REFERENCES         UPDATE TIME
echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg   True     True    24.46194839477539   hpa:default/echo   38s
```

> ## Generate traffic against `echo` `Service`

Author: Good point. I added that to Prometheus part of the guide as well.

Although I'll pass on adding includes for this now. We can do that in a separate PR later on.

---
title: Horizontally autoscale workloads using Datadog
badge: enterprise
---

{{ site.kgo_product_name }} can be integrated with [Datadog Metrics][dmetrics]
in order to use {{ site.base_gateway }} latency metrics to autoscale workloads
based on their metrics.

[dmetrics]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/metrics/

## Install Datadog in your Kubernetes cluster

### Datadog API and application keys

> In order to install Datadog agents in your cluster you will need Datadog API key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install Datadog agents in your cluster you will need a Datadog API key
```
wdyt?

and an application key. Please refer to [this Datadog manual page][ddkeys] to obtain those.

[ddkeys]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/

### Installing

> In order to install Datadog in your cluster, you can follow [this guide][ddk8sguide]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install Datadog in your cluster, you can follow [this guide][ddk8sguide]
```

or use the following `values.yaml`:

```yaml
datadog:
  kubelet:
    tlsVerify: false

clusterAgent:
  enabled: true
  # Enable the metricsProvider to be able to scale based on metrics in Datadog
  metricsProvider:
    # Set this to true to enable Metrics Provider
    enabled: true
    # Enable usage of DatadogMetric CRD to autoscale on arbitrary Datadog queries
    useDatadogMetrics: true

  prometheusScrape:
    enabled: true
    serviceEndpoints: true

agents:
  containers:
    agent:
      env:
      - name: DD_HOSTNAME
        valueFrom:
          fieldRef:
            fieldPath: spec.nodeName
```

to install [Datadog's helm chart][ddchart]:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

helm repo add datadog https://helm.datadoghq.com
helm repo update
helm install -n datadog datadog --set datadog.apiKey=${DD_APIKEY} --set datadog.AppKey=${DD_APPKEY} datadog/datadog
```

[ddk8sguide]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/containers/kubernetes/installation/?tab=helm
[ddchart]: https://github.com/DataDog/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/datadog

## Generate traffic against `echo` `Service`

Assuming that you have access to the deployed `Gateway` address you can try enforcing the scaling by issuing requests like so:

```bash
while curl -k "http://$(kubectl get gateway kong -o custom-columns='name:.status.addresses[0].value' --no-headers -n default)/echo/shell?cmd=sleep%200.1" ; do sleep 1; done
```

This will cause the underlying deployment to sleep for 100ms on each request and thus increase the average response time to that value.

Keep this running while we move on to next steps.

## Annotate {{ site.kgo_product_name }} with Datadog checks config

{:.note}
> **Note:** {{ site.kgo_product_name }} uses [kube-rbac-proxy][kuberbacproxy_github]
> to secure its endpoints behind an RBAC proxy. That's why we'd going to scrape `kube-rbac-proxy`
> and not the `manager` container.

> In order for Datadog to scrape {{ site.kgo_product_name }}'s metrics we need to let it know how to do it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Datadog to scrape {{ site.kgo_product_name }}'s metrics we need to let it know how to do it.
```

This can be done through the following annotation on {{ site.kgo_product_name }}'s Pod:

```yaml
ad.datadoghq.com/kube-rbac-proxy.checks: |
  {
    "openmetrics": {
      "instances": [
        {
          "bearer_token_auth": true,
          "bearer_token_path": "/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token",
          "tls_verify": false,
          "tls_ignore_warning": true,
          "prometheus_url": "https://%%host%%:8443/metrics",
          "namespace": "autoscaling",
          "metrics": [
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_bucket",
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_sum",
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_count",
            ],
          "send_histograms_buckets": true,
          "send_distribution_buckets": true
        }
      ]
    }
  }
```

After applying the above you should see `avg:autoscaling.kong_upstream_latency_ms{service:echo}` metrics in your Datadog Metrics explorer.

[kuberbacproxy_github]: https://github.com/brancz/kube-rbac-proxy

## Use `DatadogMetric` to configure cluster agent to expose external metric

> In order to be able to use an external metric in `HorizontalPodAutoscaler` we have
> to instruct Datadog agent to expose one for use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use an external metric in `HorizontalPodAutoscaler`, we need to configure the Datadog agent to expose it.
```

There are several ways to achieve this but we'll use a Kubernetes native way and
use [`DatadogMetric` CRD][ddmetricguide]:

```yaml
echo '
apiVersion: datadoghq.com/v1alpha1
kind: DatadogMetric
metadata:
  name: echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg
  namespace: default
spec:
  query: autoscaling.kong_upstream_latency_ms{service:echo} ' | kubectl apply -f -
```

When Datadog's agent calculates this metric for you, it will update its status:

```bash
kubectl get -n default datadogmetric echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg -w
NAME                             ACTIVE   VALID   VALUE               REFERENCES         UPDATE TIME
echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg   True     True    24.46194839477539                      38s
```

If everything works correctly, in a couple of seconds you should be able to get the metric via Kubernetes External Metrics API:

```bash

> kubectl get --raw "/apis/external.metrics.k8s.io/v1beta1/namespaces/default/datadogmetric@default:echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg" | jq

Author: Not sure about the policy. Change the snippets to by "copy-pastable"

{
  "kind": "ExternalMetricValueList",
  "apiVersion": "external.metrics.k8s.io/v1beta1",
  "metadata": {},
  "items": [
    {
      "metricName": "datadogmetric@default:echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg",
      "metricLabels": null,
      "timestamp": "2024-03-08T18:03:02Z",

>       "value": "24233138021n"

Reviewer: `n` stands for nano? You can mention that this way Datadog exposes it

Author: 👍 Added a note about that.

      stabilizationWindowSeconds: 1
      policies:
      - type: Percent
        value: 100
        periodSeconds: 10
    scaleUp:
      stabilizationWindowSeconds: 1
      policies:
      - type: Percent
        value: 100
        periodSeconds: 2
      - type: Pods
        value: 4
        periodSeconds: 2
      selectPolicy: Max

  metrics:
  - type: External
    external:
      metric:
        name: datadogmetric@default:echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg
      target:
        type: Value
        value: 40
```

This HPA will watch for `echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg` `DatadogMetric` from `default` namespace and it will scale
`echo` `Deployment` in that namespace to aim for 40ms average response time.

When everything is configured correctly, `DatadogMetric`'s status will update and it will now have a reference to the HPA:

```bash
kubectl get -n default datadogmetric echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg -w
NAME                             ACTIVE   VALID   VALUE               REFERENCES         UPDATE TIME
echo-kong-upstream-latency-avg   True     True    24.46194839477539   hpa:default/echo   38s
```

If everything went well we should see the `SuccessfulRescale` events:

```bash

> kubectl get events --field-selector involvedObject.name=echo --field-selector involvedObject.kind=HorizontalPodAutoscaler -w

Author: I'm not sure about the policy on this but I agree and UX is way better when those can be copied from the snippets. Applied the suggestion.

## Annotate {{ site.kgo_product_name }} with Datadog checks config

{:.note}
> **Note:** {{ site.kgo_product_name }} uses [kube-rbac-proxy][kuberbacproxy_github]
> to secure its endpoints behind an RBAC proxy. That's why we'd going to scrape `kube-rbac-proxy`
> and not the `manager` container.

For Datadog to scrape {{ site.kgo_product_name }}'s metrics we need to let it know how to do it.
This can be done through the following annotation on {{ site.kgo_product_name }}'s Pod:

```yaml
ad.datadoghq.com/kube-rbac-proxy.checks: |
  {
    "openmetrics": {
      "instances": [
        {
          "bearer_token_auth": true,
          "bearer_token_path": "/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token",
          "tls_verify": false,
          "tls_ignore_warning": true,
          "prometheus_url": "https://%%host%%:8443/metrics",
          "namespace": "autoscaling",
          "metrics": [
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_bucket",
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_sum",
              "kong_upstream_latency_ms_count",
            ],
          "send_histograms_buckets": true,
          "send_distribution_buckets": true
        }
      ]
    }
  }
```

> After applying the above you should see `avg:autoscaling.kong_upstream_latency_ms{service:echo}` metrics in your Datadog Metrics explorer.

Author: This metric is Datadog's `Distribution`: https://docs.datadoghq.com/metrics/distributions/.

I'm not an expert on this and for some reason this doesn't 100% track the value of an average across a designated time duration.

I've started [a thread in Datadog's slack](https://datadoghq.slack.com/archives/C3ZGCF88Z/p1709842615367649) about using 
 something like `sum:upstream_latency_ms.sum{service:echo} / sum:upstream_latency_ms.count{service:echo}` but for some reason I can't make this work. This query would better (as I look at it) track the average.
